A&V networking: sentry node proxies (#85)
w3f/research: docs/polkadot/networking/3-avail-valid.md

# Availability and Validity (A&V) networking

> This subprotocol occurs whenever the block production protocol has output a candidate block for the current relay chain height.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This subprotocol occurs whenever the relay chain block production protocol has output a candidate block for the current relay chain height.
```

### Special considerations

S1: Some validator nodes are running behind sentry nodes, who must act as their proxy. Otherwise, we can assume that all other nodes (including the sentry nodes themselves) are fully-reachable via the public internet.

To help implementation be divided into stages, the main proposal is defined without this consideration. Parts of it that will need to be changed or extended for this, are marked [[TBX S1](#sentry-node-proxies) #($ref)], TBX standing for "to be extended".

## Protocol overview

Part of this protocol relies on some pre-existing medium that allows us to broadcast various metadata to every node of the relay chain, namely:

1. receipts of specific pieces ("I have pieces X, Y and Z")
2. receipts of "enough" pieces ("I have >1/3 of pieces, I don't need more"). This could also double as an attestation to everyone else, that there is availability from the attester's position on the network.

These should be gossiped every few seconds, and allows the participants to know when the stages of the protocol begin and end, details below.

The data of the actual pieces are distributed via a topology separate from the broadcast medium:

> Recall that we have a disjoint partition of N validators into C sets of parachain validators, each set having size N/C. For our purposes for this subprotocol, we will randomly assign a co-ordinate (c, i) to every validator, with c in [0, C) and i in [0, N/C). Fixing c and varying i defines a particular parachain validator set; varying c and fixing i defines what we'll call a particular validator "ring". This name is only meant to be very slightly suggestive, the precise structure and its justification will be described below.

Reviewer 2: This is beyond the scope of the current PR, but I wonder about the coordinate scheme in situations where we may have groups of slightly different sizes if `C` is not a divisor of `N`. In practice, we have two options. The first is to spread the remainder over groups, so you have `N%C` groups with 1 extra validator. The other option is to leave some random N%C validators idle for a session. Ensuring that `C` is a divisor poses challenges on implementation and usability so I'd prefer to leave that off the table. Our thinking has been leaning towards option 1 so far, what do you think?

Reviewer 3: Yes, one extra sounds fine.  I still kinda dislike the grid topology here since we can attach fairly regular bipartite graphs every parachain group pair.

Author: The grid topology was mainly motivated back when originally I thought I might have to handle nodes with arbitrary NAT situations. So it is not essential, it can be changed. However it does make load-balancing easy to reason about, and I couldn't immediately think of anything that was significantly better.

Author: I will add a paragraph mentioning what happens with unevenly-sized parachains, with the "one extra" approach. BTW, this problem occurs with the bipartite-graphs topology as well, since obviously you can't have a perfect matching between sets of size (C) and (C+1).

Author: OK, this is actually way less trivial than I thought, at leas to do it in a way that preserves load-balancing properties and avoids some nodes having to do 2x the amount of work. Will have to spend a bit more time to think about this.

Author: Note: simply spreading the extra validators across the existing groups, is not well-defined, because you need to define what pieces they are supposed to distribute to everyone else in the group. But there is already someone from their chain, that is distributing a well-defined set of pieces to everyone else in the group.

I will merge this PR and file an issue about this.

Author: Tracking in w3f/research-internal#390

a. for incoming connections, the sentry node accepts these and proxies them back to the validator node<br/>
b. for outgoing connections, either the validator node makes the connection directly, or else makes it via their sentry node.

In some cases where both peers are behind their own sentries, this may be up to 2 hops. However, it is unnecessary to have special-case logic to handle this situation. The following general rules will suffice, and they can be applied even to normal validator nodes (those running without sentries):

1. For the address book, the validator should insert (or have their sentry nodes insert) the addresses of whatever nodes are acting as incoming proxies for it, what other people can reach. The following details are important:

    a. each record should include a creation date, so that later entries unambiguously obsolete earlier entries. Thus load-balancing can be done in a more predictable way, across the full set of addresses.

    b. each record should include an expiry date, so that old addresses are unambiguously avoided by readers unsure if the entry they got is "too old" or not

> 2. For transport session keys, any node claiming to be a validator or a proxy for one, must present a certificate proving that the validator key authorises the transport key to do so. This ties back into the [authentication proposals](#L-authentication.html#proposal-fresh-authentication-signals).

Reviewer: These *certificates* would tie into the proposal in https://github.com/w3f/research/blob/master/docs/polkadot/networking/L-authentication.rst correct?

Author: Yes, there is a link right there :)

It's unnecessary to distinguish between "is a validator" and "acting as a proxy for a validator". This could be given as optional information in the certificate (e.g. so that the peer expects a higher latency), or it may be omitted if the validator wants to withhold this information from its peers. Nodes are free to guess whether their peers are proxies or not.

#### Proxy protocol

The proxying protocol is straightforward, since the private validator node and the sentry nodes trust each other.

> 1. Inbound, the protocol does not require any special headers (unwrapping/rewrapping of the content). Whenever a sentry node accepts an incoming connection, it forwards it directly onto the single sentry node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Inbound, the protocol does not require any special headers (unwrapping/rewrapping of the content). Whenever a sentry node accepts an incoming connection, it forwards it directly onto the single validator node.
```

Correct?

Author: Added, thanks

> 1. Inbound, the protocol does not require any special headers (unwrapping/rewrapping of the content). Whenever a sentry node accepts an incoming connection, it forwards it directly onto the single sentry node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Inbound, the protocol does not require any special headers (unwrapping/rewrapping of the content). Whenever a sentry node accepts an incoming connection, it forwards it directly onto the corresponding validator node.
```

Today a sentry node can sentry for multiple validator nodes. I guess, given that the original message includes the validator session key (or some similar identification token), the sentry node can decide which validator to forward the message to.

    Justification: in our A&V direct-sending protocol, the contents are all signed by their authors, so there is no need for extra checking at the sentry node, although this may be done either to simplify the code or as extra "defense in depth". In all cases, proper exercise of flow control at the private validator node is necessary to prevent the sentry node from spamming it by mistake.

2. Outbound, the protocol needs special headers for the private validator node to tell the sentry node the outgoing destination. This is straightforward: namely the peer validator's key.

Recall that as above, there are two types of outbound connections: distributors pushing data, or distributees requesting data.

> Since the private validator node may not be able to access the address book, the sentry node is the one to perform the address book lookup. As described in 1(a) above, in the general case it will get a set of addresses as the result. For better load-balancing, the sentry node should sort this set and select the jth address to connect to, where j = i mod n, n is the size of the set, and (c, i) is the co-ordinate of its validator.

Reviewer: > jth address

What does *jth* stand for?

Author: It defines `j` just a few words afterwards, is it not clear?

> Since the private validator node may not be able to access the address book, the sentry node is the one to perform the address book lookup. As described in 1(a) above, in the general case it will get a set of addresses as the result. For better load-balancing, the sentry node should sort this set and select the jth address to connect to, where j = i mod n, n is the size of the set, and (c, i) is the co-ordinate of its validator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Say the address book is realized via a Kademlia Dht. Given that the private validator won't be able to make outbound connections beyond its sentry nodes the validator node may not be able to access the address book. The sentry node is the one to perform the address book lookup. As described in 1(a) above, in the general case it will get a set of addresses as the result. For better load-balancing, the sentry node should sort this set and select the jth address to connect to, where j = i mod n, n is the size of the set, and (c, i) is the co-ordinate of its validator.
```

Author: I wanted this paragraph to be general, since in the future we may want to have part of the address-book onchain in which case the private validator node would be able to access it. But still part of it would be on the kademlia DHT, so it is probably better to have the sentry node resolve it all the time.
